---
title: Home
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---

# ePortfolio
A portfolio of the Weight and See Mobile Application, developed by Laura Brooks

SNHU Capstone Project: CS499-12473-M01

10/20/2024

# Professional Assessment
placeholder


### Artifact Description

The artifact chosen for this project is a mobile application titled Weight and See, which was first developed in the CS 360: Mobile Architecture and Programming course. The artifact will be used for all three categories. The course was originally completed in Feb/Mar 2022 and included an initial design as well as some placeholders for extended functionality. The application was built using the Android Studio as the IDE and the languages used are java and XML. The application includes functionality to login or create an account, then displays a list of weights by date that have been entered to show progress towards a goal weight. The app uses the Room Library which functions as an Internal database utilizing SQLite. Although these enhancements will focus on the basic shell and database CRUD methods, the application was built with the intention to expand that functionality in later phases.

### Reason for Artifact Selection

This mobile app was selected for two main reasons; mobile development is an appealing career avenue, and the languages used are similar but with enough gaps to learn some new skills. The original purpose of the Weight and See app was aimed towards tracking a personal weight loss journey, however, there are other plans to reconfigure the application to use as a Material Load Weight Tracking app for a trucking hauling business. The opportunity to develop a piece of work that can be showcased, as well as reused in a realistic scenario, plus learning a new skill was highly appealing. Java and XML are very similar languages to C# and HTML, which makes a smooth transition simple. However, there is value in applying the experience I have understanding modular, object-oriented coding to learn a new style of coding. The experience made me think outside the box and look at the core structure of the application to understand where certain pieces to fit. For example, mobile applications developed in Android Studio separate style features in the resource section which encourages a relative link back to a single variable, versus absolute styles hardcoded into a CSS file. These variations are easy to pick up and was an excellent choice to begin branching out skills.

# ENHANCEMENT PROCESS REFLECTION
### Category One: Software Design & Engineering

Since the same artifact will be used throughout the course for all categories, the enhancement progress is intertwined between all 3 categories of the course. For example, design documents have been developed to support the Software Development Life Cycle, database functionality has been added, colors are considered, and code functions that can be modular or reusable are favored. All these tasks contribute to a software design/engineering category. Strategic and critical thinking is involved to re-engineer an existing application that will build on stale functionality. I am confident in the structure I created to make the application organized and easy to follow.  By creating meaningful classes with appropriate arguments that will be called throughout the project securely and efficiently shows evidence of being able to structure an application in a logical way that is transferrable to other developers. I am confident in my abilities to analyze code for potential security risks. I created some validation functions and unit tests to ensure the entered data matches the requirements and checks for SQL injection. Additionally, any arguments passed need to be done in a way that will not allow vulnerabilities. For example, when passing the User ID from screen to screen, the code includes checks for potential hacking risks. If someone can update a user ID in the backend code, like a query string or hidden field, it will allow any user to change the ID to any account. This field is secure and hidden. 
Along the development path, challenges were encountered. It was important to use the resources available to me to troubleshoot problem code or research a function that I am not familiar with. This occurred often when learning how to apply the Room Library database code to my methods. I have a comfortable confidence in my ability to build ASP.NET MVC applications with a SQL Database back-end. This knowledge was helpful when applying database functionality to mobile applications in Java. After many years of experience growing in the software development field, knowing how to apply problem solving skills to the tricky nuisances is paramount. For example, when I have a piece of code that is not working, I will comment out everything and add code in line by line until I understand the issue. As I was working through the enhancements, I had some PC slowness issues that required me to re-evaluate the proposed requirements. Providing realistic deadlines and then re-assessing along the way are characteristics I have learned to develop with experience. One of my better strengths is being able to size a project with the amount of work needed within the deadline available, while also setting realistic expectations of the final product. By reducing the number of enhancements in my initial project proposal, I will be able to deliver a clean, workable solution that still showcases my skills as a software developer.  

### Category Two: Algorithms and Data Sets

Once the design preparations are completed and the basic shell is created, focus is now geared towards writing code that uses the full capability of the Java language and algorithmic practices. Screens are represented as a single class, with breakout for more complex functionality to use fragment classes or view models. This helps keep the code catalogued while also taking advantage of any opportunity to use modularized functions. For example, regarding validation, functions that verify data types and size are reusable throughout the screens. These functions also include unit tests to ensure the integrity of the data is accurate. I made use of looping or conditional statements whenever possible, particularly when checking database results. Another example of this is the use of a switch statement to run different menu options based on the selection made on that screen. Arrays and looping are required to display a list of recordset results from the database.
Some challenges related to this category include the use of an “Intent” action and passing an argument between screens. The Intent action is the Java/Mobile application version of switching views and it is not a topic that I am familiar with. Along with the Intent action, Java provides an ability to add extra values to the Instance state. Setting and retrieving these values have been somewhat difficult because they must be done at the correct thread level. I worked through some debugging exercises to figure out when the values were being set, when they were dropped, and locating the appropriate error. I am more familiar with query strings and being able to view those values in a browser tool. Mobile Applications do not operate the same way so there was a learning curve in this area.

### Category Three: Databases

The database enhancement included adding a back-end database solution from the ground up. There was no existing database in the original, starting version of the application. The Room Library solution could be added to the existing application which uses a SQL-Lite style that runs internally so no additional or external servers were required. I began by creating some model files that will generate the database columns and set or get the values of a record set. Database Access Object (DAO) files are used to store and recall any SQL queries written to pull the data. The layout of the database can be easily scaled up in scenarios where further enhancements are applied. Files for data models were written to store the data schema of each table. Understanding the datatypes of a database and how each value is best stored is important in the initial design because it helps keep changes to a minimum.
Although the database solution is setup in a way that matches my experience and skills, there were some key challenges when attempting to write functional algorithms and methods to connect the data to user entries and dashboards. This mobile application style uses View Models, which is common in modular style applications, but there were some new functions to learn such as Recycler Views and Fragment sections. These functions are basically a different way of calling a small set of data into a frameset of the screen, but the setup is a new concept that I had to research. The learning curve is related to getting the list object pulled from a database to display in a Recycler View in XML format. This is different from an HTML based MVC project were razor code can be applied to the view.



